turbo-refresh-animations/README.md, before:

# Turbo Refresh Animations

CSS class-based animations for [Turbo](https://turbo.hotwired.dev/) page refresh morphs. Animates elements when they're created, changed, or deleted during Turbo morphs.

**Features:**
- Opt-in animations via `data-turbo-refresh-animate` attribute
- Animate creates, changes, and deletes
- Protect elements (especially forms) from being morphed during broadcast refreshes
- Customize animations via CSS classes or CSS variables
- Works with importmaps, esbuild, webpack, or any bundler

## Installation

### With importmaps (Rails 7+)

```bash
bin/importmap pin turbo-refresh-animations
```

### With npm/yarn

```bash
npm install turbo-refresh-animations
# or
yarn add turbo-refresh-animations
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Import the library

```javascript
// app/javascript/application.js
import "@hotwired/turbo-rails"
import "turbo-refresh-animations"
```

### 2. Import the CSS

```css
/* app/assets/stylesheets/application.css */
@import "turbo-refresh-animations/turbo-refresh-animations.css";
/* or */
@import "turbo-refresh-animations/style.css";
```

Without a CSS bundler, copy `node_modules/turbo-refresh-animations/turbo-refresh-animations.css` into your app and include it as usual.

### 3. Enable morphing in your layout

```erb
<%# app/views/layouts/application.html.erb %>
<head>
  <%= turbo_refreshes_with method: :morph, scroll: :preserve %>
</head>
```

### 4. Opt in elements for animations

Add `data-turbo-refresh-animate` and an `id` to elements you want to animate:

```erb
<%# app/views/items/_item.html.erb %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate>
  <%= item.title %>
</div>
```

Elements will animate when created, changed, or deleted during Turbo morphs.

## How It Works

The library compares each element's "meaningful signature" before and after Turbo renders a page refresh morph. Only elements with both an `id` and the `data-turbo-refresh-animate` attribute will be animated:

| Animation | Trigger | Default Class |
|-----------|---------|---------------|
| Enter | New element added to DOM | `turbo-refresh-enter` |
| Change | Element text changes (or version changes) | `turbo-refresh-change` |
| Exit | Element removed from DOM | `turbo-refresh-exit` |

### Change Detection

By default, change animations run only when an element's normalized `textContent` differs between the old and new page. This naturally ignores most "noise" that isn't user-visible (CSRF tokens, framework attributes, etc.).

Normalization collapses all whitespace to single spaces and trims leading/trailing whitespace.

For precise control (and to count non-text changes as meaningful), use `data-turbo-refresh-version`:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-version="<%= item.cache_key_with_version %>">
  <%= item.title %>
  <%= button_to "Delete", item, method: :delete %>
</div>
```

When `data-turbo-refresh-version` is present, it's used instead of `textContent` to decide whether a change is meaningful. This is useful when:

- Elements contain forms with CSRF tokens (via `button_to`)
- Elements include dynamic attributes from JavaScript frameworks
- You want explicit control over what constitutes a "change"

## Protecting Elements During Broadcasts

### `data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent`

When using `broadcasts_refreshes_to` for real-time updates, any element with this attribute will be protected from morphing during broadcast-triggered refreshes. This is useful for any element whose current DOM state you want to preserve when other users' actions trigger a page refresh.

```erb
<div id="my_element" data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent>
  <!-- This element won't be morphed during broadcasts -->
</div>
```

**The most common use case is forms.** Without protection, a user typing in a form would lose their input whenever another user's action triggers a broadcast refresh:

```erb
<div id="new_item_form" data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent>
  <%= form_with model: [list, item] do |f| %>
    <%= f.text_field :title %>
    <%= f.submit "Add" %>
  <% end %>
</div>
```

### Form-specific conveniences

Since forms are the most common use case, the library includes special handling:

1. **Submitter's form still clears**: When a user submits a form inside a protected element, that specific element is allowed to morph normally (so the form clears after submission via the redirect response). Other protected elements remain protected.

2. **Same-page refreshes preserve state**: Even during refresh morphs that stay on the same URL (e.g., `redirect_to` back to the current page), elements with `data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent` stay protected. This preserves user-created UI state like open edit forms. If a user clicks a same‑page link inside a protected element (e.g., "Cancel"), the library sets `data-turbo-action="replace"` on that link so Turbo uses a refresh morph; the initiating element updates while other protected elements remain open.

### Flash protected elements on update

To show a visual indicator when a protected element's underlying data changes (e.g., another user edits the same item), add `data-turbo-refresh-version`:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-version="<%= item.cache_key_with_version %>">
  <%= form_with model: [item.list, item] do |f| %>
    <%= f.text_field :title %>
    <%= f.submit "Save" %>
  <% end %>
</div>
```

When the version changes during a broadcast, the element flashes with the change animation while keeping its current content protected.

Note: protected elements can temporarily be in a different "view state" than the server-rendered HTML (e.g., an open edit form vs a read-only item view). To avoid false positives, the library only flashes protected elements based on `data-turbo-refresh-version` from the incoming HTML. In practice, add `data-turbo-refresh-version` to all render variants of a given `id` if you want flashing to work reliably.

## Customization

### Override via CSS variables

```css
:root {
  /* Change animation color */
  --turbo-refresh-change-color: #FFF3CD;  /* yellow background flash */

  /* Timing */
  --turbo-refresh-enter-duration: 300ms;
  --turbo-refresh-exit-duration: 300ms;
  --turbo-refresh-change-duration: 800ms;
  --turbo-refresh-easing: ease-out;
}
```

### Custom animation classes per element

Use a different animation class for specific elements:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-enter="my-custom-enter"
     data-turbo-refresh-exit="my-custom-exit">
  <!-- Uses my-custom-enter and my-custom-exit instead of defaults -->
</div>
```

### Enable specific animations

By default, `data-turbo-refresh-animate` enables all three animation types. Specify a comma-separated list to enable only certain types:

```erb
<%# Only animate exits (no enter or change) %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate="exit">

<%# Animate enter and exit (no change) %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate="enter,exit">

<%# All animations (default) %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate>
```

Options: `enter`, `exit`, `change`

To explicitly disable animations on an element, use `data-turbo-refresh-animate="none"` (or `"false"`). This can be useful when a helper emits the attribute automatically.

### Define your own animations

You can override the default classes or use custom class names per element.

Exit animations can be implemented with CSS transitions (not just keyframes). The exit class should
change a property with a non-zero transition duration (for example, opacity or transform). The
element is removed after the transition ends (with a timeout fallback).

For predictable timing, use explicit transition properties (e.g., `opacity, transform`) instead of
`transition-property: all`.

#### Example: Background color flash

```css
/* Enter - green background fade */
@keyframes bg-flash-enter {
  from { background-color: #D1E7DD; }
  to   { background-color: inherit; }
}

.bg-flash-enter {
  animation: bg-flash-enter 1.2s ease-out;
}

/* Change - yellow background fade */
@keyframes bg-flash-change {
  from { background-color: #FFF3CD; }
  to   { background-color: inherit; }
}

.bg-flash-change {
  animation: bg-flash-change 1.2s ease-out;
}

/* Exit - red background fade + opacity */
@keyframes bg-flash-exit {
  from { background-color: #F8D7DA; opacity: 1; }
  to   { background-color: inherit; opacity: 0; }
}

.bg-flash-exit {
  animation: bg-flash-exit 0.6s ease-out forwards;
}
```

#### Example: Slide in/out

```css
@keyframes slideInDown {
  from {
    transform: translate3d(0, -100%, 0);
    visibility: visible;
  }
  to {
    transform: translate3d(0, 0, 0);
  }
}

.slideInDown {
  animation: slideInDown 0.5s ease-out;
}

@keyframes slideOutUp {
  from {
    transform: translate3d(0, 0, 0);
  }
  to {
    visibility: hidden;
    transform: translate3d(0, -100%, 0);
  }
}

.slideOutUp {
  animation: slideOutUp 0.5s ease-out forwards;
}
```

Use custom classes per element:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-enter="slideInDown"
     data-turbo-refresh-exit="slideOutUp">
  <%= item.title %>
</div>
```

### Default animations

The included CSS provides simple, unobtrusive animations:

- **Enter**: Fade in (`--turbo-refresh-enter-duration`, default 300ms)
- **Exit**: Fade out (`--turbo-refresh-exit-duration`, default 300ms)
- **Change**: Yellow background flash (`--turbo-refresh-change-duration`, default 800ms)

Animations automatically reduce for users with `prefers-reduced-motion: reduce`.

## Data Attributes Reference

| Attribute | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|
| `id` | Element identifier (required) |
| `data-turbo-refresh-animate` | Opt-in for animations (`=""`/present enables all, `="enter,exit"` enables subset, `="none"` disables) |
| `data-turbo-refresh-enter="class"` | Custom enter animation class |
| `data-turbo-refresh-change="class"` | Custom change animation class |
| `data-turbo-refresh-exit="class"` | Custom exit animation class |
| `data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent` | Protect element during broadcast morphs |
| `data-turbo-refresh-version` | Override change detection (used instead of `textContent`, e.g. `item.cache_key_with_version`) |

## Example: Todo List Item

```erb
<%# app/views/items/_item.html.erb %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     class="list-item"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate>
  <span><%= item.title %></span>
  <%= button_to "Delete", item, method: :delete %>
</div>
```

## Example: Edit Form with Protection

```erb
<%# app/views/items/_edit_form.html.erb %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-version="<%= item.cache_key_with_version %>">
  <%= form_with model: item do |f| %>
    <%= f.text_field :title %>
    <%= f.submit "Save" %>
    <%= link_to "Cancel", items_path %>
  <% end %>
</div>
```

## Browser Support

Works in all browsers that support Turbo 8+ (modern browsers).

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Avoid forcing replace for anchor links

turbo-refresh-animations/README.md, after:

# Turbo Refresh Animations

CSS class-based animations for [Turbo](https://turbo.hotwired.dev/) page refresh morphs. Animates elements when they're created, changed, or deleted during Turbo morphs.

**Features:**
- Opt-in animations via `data-turbo-refresh-animate` attribute
- Animate creates, changes, and deletes
- Protect elements (especially forms) from being morphed during broadcast refreshes
- Customize animations via CSS classes or CSS variables
- Works with importmaps, esbuild, webpack, or any bundler

## Installation

### With importmaps (Rails 7+)

```bash
bin/importmap pin turbo-refresh-animations
```

### With npm/yarn

```bash
npm install turbo-refresh-animations
# or
yarn add turbo-refresh-animations
```

## Quick Start

### 1. Import the library

```javascript
// app/javascript/application.js
import "@hotwired/turbo-rails"
import "turbo-refresh-animations"
```

### 2. Import the CSS

```css
/* app/assets/stylesheets/application.css */
@import "turbo-refresh-animations/turbo-refresh-animations.css";
/* or */
@import "turbo-refresh-animations/style.css";
```

Without a CSS bundler, copy `node_modules/turbo-refresh-animations/turbo-refresh-animations.css` into your app and include it as usual.

### 3. Enable morphing in your layout

```erb
<%# app/views/layouts/application.html.erb %>
<head>
  <%= turbo_refreshes_with method: :morph, scroll: :preserve %>
</head>
```

### 4. Opt in elements for animations

Add `data-turbo-refresh-animate` and an `id` to elements you want to animate:

```erb
<%# app/views/items/_item.html.erb %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate>
  <%= item.title %>
</div>
```

Elements will animate when created, changed, or deleted during Turbo morphs.

## How It Works

The library compares each element's "meaningful signature" before and after Turbo renders a page refresh morph. Only elements with both an `id` and the `data-turbo-refresh-animate` attribute will be animated:

| Animation | Trigger | Default Class |
|-----------|---------|---------------|
| Enter | New element added to DOM | `turbo-refresh-enter` |
| Change | Element text changes (or version changes) | `turbo-refresh-change` |
| Exit | Element removed from DOM | `turbo-refresh-exit` |

### Change Detection

By default, change animations run only when an element's normalized `textContent` differs between the old and new page. This naturally ignores most "noise" that isn't user-visible (CSRF tokens, framework attributes, etc.).

Normalization collapses all whitespace to single spaces and trims leading/trailing whitespace.

For precise control (and to count non-text changes as meaningful), use `data-turbo-refresh-version`:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-version="<%= item.cache_key_with_version %>">
  <%= item.title %>
  <%= button_to "Delete", item, method: :delete %>
</div>
```

When `data-turbo-refresh-version` is present, it's used instead of `textContent` to decide whether a change is meaningful. This is useful when:

- Elements contain forms with CSRF tokens (via `button_to`)
- Elements include dynamic attributes from JavaScript frameworks
- You want explicit control over what constitutes a "change"

## Protecting Elements During Broadcasts

### `data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent`

When using `broadcasts_refreshes_to` for real-time updates, any element with this attribute will be protected from morphing during broadcast-triggered refreshes. This is useful for any element whose current DOM state you want to preserve when other users' actions trigger a page refresh.

```erb
<div id="my_element" data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent>
  <!-- This element won't be morphed during broadcasts -->
</div>
```

**The most common use case is forms.** Without protection, a user typing in a form would lose their input whenever another user's action triggers a broadcast refresh:

```erb
<div id="new_item_form" data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent>
  <%= form_with model: [list, item] do |f| %>
    <%= f.text_field :title %>
    <%= f.submit "Add" %>
  <% end %>
</div>
```

### Form-specific conveniences

Since forms are the most common use case, the library includes special handling:

1. **Submitter's form still clears**: When a user submits a form inside a protected element, that specific element is allowed to morph normally (so the form clears after submission via the redirect response). Other protected elements remain protected.

2. **Same-page refreshes preserve state**: Even during refresh morphs that stay on the same URL (e.g., `redirect_to` back to the current page), elements with `data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent` stay protected. This preserves user-created UI state like open edit forms. If a user clicks a same‑page link inside a protected element (e.g., "Cancel"), the library sets `data-turbo-action="replace"` on that link so Turbo uses a refresh morph; the initiating element updates while other protected elements remain open.
   - Note: links to an anchor in the current document (e.g. `/lists/1#comments`) are treated as in-page navigation and are not forced into a refresh morph.

### Flash protected elements on update

To show a visual indicator when a protected element's underlying data changes (e.g., another user edits the same item), add `data-turbo-refresh-version`:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-version="<%= item.cache_key_with_version %>">
  <%= form_with model: [item.list, item] do |f| %>
    <%= f.text_field :title %>
    <%= f.submit "Save" %>
  <% end %>
</div>
```

When the version changes during a broadcast, the element flashes with the change animation while keeping its current content protected.

Note: protected elements can temporarily be in a different "view state" than the server-rendered HTML (e.g., an open edit form vs a read-only item view). To avoid false positives, the library only flashes protected elements based on `data-turbo-refresh-version` from the incoming HTML. In practice, add `data-turbo-refresh-version` to all render variants of a given `id` if you want flashing to work reliably.

## Customization

### Override via CSS variables

```css
:root {
  /* Change animation color */
  --turbo-refresh-change-color: #FFF3CD;  /* yellow background flash */

  /* Timing */
  --turbo-refresh-enter-duration: 300ms;
  --turbo-refresh-exit-duration: 300ms;
  --turbo-refresh-change-duration: 800ms;
  --turbo-refresh-easing: ease-out;
}
```

### Custom animation classes per element

Use a different animation class for specific elements:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-enter="my-custom-enter"
     data-turbo-refresh-exit="my-custom-exit">
  <!-- Uses my-custom-enter and my-custom-exit instead of defaults -->
</div>
```

### Enable specific animations

By default, `data-turbo-refresh-animate` enables all three animation types. Specify a comma-separated list to enable only certain types:

```erb
<%# Only animate exits (no enter or change) %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate="exit">

<%# Animate enter and exit (no change) %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate="enter,exit">

<%# All animations (default) %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>" data-turbo-refresh-animate>
```

Options: `enter`, `exit`, `change`

To explicitly disable animations on an element, use `data-turbo-refresh-animate="none"` (or `"false"`). This can be useful when a helper emits the attribute automatically.

### Define your own animations

You can override the default classes or use custom class names per element.

Exit animations can be implemented with CSS transitions (not just keyframes). The exit class should
change a property with a non-zero transition duration (for example, opacity or transform). The
element is removed after the transition ends (with a timeout fallback).

For predictable timing, use explicit transition properties (e.g., `opacity, transform`) instead of
`transition-property: all`.

#### Example: Background color flash

```css
/* Enter - green background fade */
@keyframes bg-flash-enter {
  from { background-color: #D1E7DD; }
  to   { background-color: inherit; }
}

.bg-flash-enter {
  animation: bg-flash-enter 1.2s ease-out;
}

/* Change - yellow background fade */
@keyframes bg-flash-change {
  from { background-color: #FFF3CD; }
  to   { background-color: inherit; }
}

.bg-flash-change {
  animation: bg-flash-change 1.2s ease-out;
}

/* Exit - red background fade + opacity */
@keyframes bg-flash-exit {
  from { background-color: #F8D7DA; opacity: 1; }
  to   { background-color: inherit; opacity: 0; }
}

.bg-flash-exit {
  animation: bg-flash-exit 0.6s ease-out forwards;
}
```

#### Example: Slide in/out

```css
@keyframes slideInDown {
  from {
    transform: translate3d(0, -100%, 0);
    visibility: visible;
  }
  to {
    transform: translate3d(0, 0, 0);
  }
}

.slideInDown {
  animation: slideInDown 0.5s ease-out;
}

@keyframes slideOutUp {
  from {
    transform: translate3d(0, 0, 0);
  }
  to {
    visibility: hidden;
    transform: translate3d(0, -100%, 0);
  }
}

.slideOutUp {
  animation: slideOutUp 0.5s ease-out forwards;
}
```

Use custom classes per element:

```erb
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-enter="slideInDown"
     data-turbo-refresh-exit="slideOutUp">
  <%= item.title %>
</div>
```

### Default animations

The included CSS provides simple, unobtrusive animations:

- **Enter**: Fade in (`--turbo-refresh-enter-duration`, default 300ms)
- **Exit**: Fade out (`--turbo-refresh-exit-duration`, default 300ms)
- **Change**: Yellow background flash (`--turbo-refresh-change-duration`, default 800ms)

Animations automatically reduce for users with `prefers-reduced-motion: reduce`.

## Data Attributes Reference

| Attribute | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|
| `id` | Element identifier (required) |
| `data-turbo-refresh-animate` | Opt-in for animations (`=""`/present enables all, `="enter,exit"` enables subset, `="none"` disables) |
| `data-turbo-refresh-enter="class"` | Custom enter animation class |
| `data-turbo-refresh-change="class"` | Custom change animation class |
| `data-turbo-refresh-exit="class"` | Custom exit animation class |
| `data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent` | Protect element during broadcast morphs |
| `data-turbo-refresh-version` | Override change detection (used instead of `textContent`, e.g. `item.cache_key_with_version`) |

## Example: Todo List Item

```erb
<%# app/views/items/_item.html.erb %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     class="list-item"
     data-turbo-refresh-animate>
  <span><%= item.title %></span>
  <%= button_to "Delete", item, method: :delete %>
</div>
```

## Example: Edit Form with Protection

```erb
<%# app/views/items/_edit_form.html.erb %>
<div id="<%= dom_id(item) %>"
     data-turbo-stream-refresh-permanent
     data-turbo-refresh-animate
     data-turbo-refresh-version="<%= item.cache_key_with_version %>">
  <%= form_with model: item do |f| %>
    <%= f.text_field :title %>
    <%= f.submit "Save" %>
    <%= link_to "Cancel", items_path %>
  <% end %>
</div>
```

## Browser Support

Works in all browsers that support Turbo 8+ (modern browsers).

## License

MIT
